###### On the teaching of history
# Letters to the editor 
> Aug 17th 2019 
Given Bagehot’s disdain for those who fiddle with footnotes, it is hardly surprising that he gives no evidence for his claim that academic historians have neglected the study of politics, power and nation states in favour of the marginal, the poor and everyday life (July 20th). Today’s course offerings and publishers’ lists suggest that political and military history are alive and well in Britain. The websites of the university presses of Oxford and Cambridge include recent books by historians on the Peterloo massacre, Hitler, administration and war in colonial India, American foreign relations, medieval Anglo-papal relations, the German nation-state and 21st-century generalship, to name just a few. A search of British university websites reveals an array of history courses on politics, war and power. 
I am baffled by the assertion that academic scholars are isolated in professional cocoons. Many historians, besides the three mentioned by Bagehot, appear on or consult with the BBC, tweet on current issues and write pieces in mass-market publications. 
It is true that history enrolments are falling, and that the level of historical knowledge among Americans and Britons is disappointing. But reversing these trends requires analysis of their causes, not evidence-free straw men. 
SARA LIPTONProfessor of historyState University of New York at Stony Brook 
Never have so many attendees at history festivals, book-buyers, students and schoolteachers benefited from the efforts of academic historians. The global success of Radio 4’s “In Our Time” depends on the contributions of experts. 
History in Britain is rightly viewed as a sensible education; training for careers in museums, charities, the law, journalism, design, theatre, the civil service and more. Young people tell us they choose to study history at university not only out of interest, but because they understand that history will prepare them well for a world of change, complexity and diversity. 
All forms of expertise have been denigrated and lampooned of late. The popular history Bagehot celebrates, especially on television, is often forced by the medium to be formulaic and sensational. Our public conversations have become sites of emotive outbursts, rather than reasoned exchanges where historical understanding can be marshalled. History is alive and well in our universities, but do we deserve it? 
MIRI RUBINProfessor of medieval and early modern historyQueen Mary University of London 
Bagehot correctly laments the absurd bureaucracy of modern academia, then blames historians for the result. Grand books of the sort he likes now carry heavy penalties for author and university if they cannot be fitted into the time frame of the research assessment exercise. He may lament the days of A.J.P. Taylor, but few newspapers are interested in informed comment, and television prefers to take the work of academics and put it into the mouths of more scenic presenters. There is not much historians can do about that. 
He yearns for more books on great men and battles, and more constitutional history of the old sort. But if you want a good biography of Gladstone or a sound account of parliamentary procedure after the Great Reform (and few do) there are excellent ones already. Why should historians spend their time, and other peoples’ money, repeating what has been done so well before? When a non-academic fulfils Bagehot’s requirement for men and battles, the results are sometimes excellent (Antony Beevor), but are equally often unreliable vanity projects. Does he seriously want academics to emulate Jacob Rees-Mogg on the Victorians, or Boris Johnson on Churchill? 
Historians are producing more interesting books than they have done for years, largely because they are no longer shackled by an Anglocentric perspective. Peter Frankopan’s book on the Silk Roads and global histories by Chris Bayly or John Darwin are only a few examples. Moreover, Lyndal Roper is unknown only to those with a very parochial range of interests. Her biography of Luther was widely reviewed, commercially published and sold exceptionally well in many countries. 
IAIN PEARSOxford 
As founding members of the new Society for the History of War, we were surprised by Bagehot’s comment that “constitutional and military affairs are all but ignored” in British universities. Far from it. The history of warfare is an exceptionally lively field. Academic historians played key roles in the recent commemorations of the first world war and D-Day. We would, moreover, contest the distinction Bagehot draws between military affairs and “marginal” topics. The well-known adage that an army marches on its stomach makes the point that no competent military strategist should dismiss everyday life experience, still less the gendered question of who cooks. 
PETER WILSONProfessor of the history of warUniversity of Oxford 
Recently retired after 48 years of teaching history, I concur with Bagehot’s lament. In 1995 James McPherson, an eminent historian on the American civil war, wrote an essay, “What’s the Matter With History?” Although his “Battle Cry of Freedom” won the Pulitzer prize, it didn’t receive an award from any of the professional historian associations. Mr McPherson recounted how a colleague told him that he was in danger of becoming a popular historian, rather than a historian’s historian. When he asked why he could not be both, his colleague only “smiled sadly” at his naivety. 
STEVE KRAMERDallas 
The problem with teaching history in Britain starts in the school curriculum. There is no British narrative. British students pass history exams without understanding anything about this country’s history, such as the evolution of Parliament. They know more about the American civil-rights movement than they do the partition of India, the Commonwealth or Windrush. 
CAROL GROSELondon 
The learning of history is changing with the times. History tours are among the most popular tourist activities in European cities. Archaeological sites such as Pompeii, Machu Picchu and Petra are some of the most visited places in the world. CrashCourse, a series of quirky history videos on YouTube enjoyed by teenagers and adults, gets millions of views. At the Radical Tea Towel Company (where I work) our weekly history newsletter reaches more than 40,000 people in Britain and America. 
MATTHEW BUCCELLIBerlin 
Bagehot’s ruminations about the state of history as an academic discipline brought me back to a time when I faced similar concerns, as I considered whether or not to pursue a doctorate in history. In the end, I followed my mentor’s advice: “If you want to truly study history nowadays, you should concentrate on international relations or economics.” 
ORE KORENAssistant professorDepartment of Political ScienceIndiana UniversityBloomington, Indiana 
