###### On gerrymandering, mosques, roundabouts, swimming, Minnesota, emus
# Letters 
##### Letters to the editor 
> Jan 17th 2019 
The Graphic detail article on “The failure of gerrymandering” (January 5th) suggested that the strong Democratic showing in last November’s mid-terms compensated for the “vaunted pro-Republican bias” in drawing the lines of congressional districts. In fact, that bias in the House of Representatives is still strong. 
In five states where gerrymandered lines were still in use—Maryland, Michigan, North Carolina, Ohio and Wisconsin—incumbent political parties lost control of only two out of 58 seats, or 3%. In contrast, Pennsylvania, where gerrymandered districts were overturned by a state court, four of the 18 seats flipped party, or 22%. So where gerrymandering was still in effect, it nearly froze representation, even in the face of the biggest wave of voter sentiment in decades. 
In a fair system of single-member districts, a majority party almost always wins a greater share of seats than it does votes. This is an old law of political science. For example, in 2014 Republicans won 53% of the two-party national vote and 57% of the seats. Yet in 2018 Democrats won over 54% of the two-party vote but only 54% of seats. In short, Democrats underperformed fair expectations, thanks in large part to distorted district boundaries. This asymmetric performance by the two parties is evidence of a persistent tilt in the political playing field. 
To achieve fair elections, it is important to understand the flaws in the electoral system. Under the rules, the Democrats in 2020 could all too easily repeat what happened in 2012: win the presidency and popular vote in Congress, but fail to control the House. Mitigating this unfairness will require legal reforms to deny politicians a free hand in drawing their own district boundaries. 
PROFESSOR SAM WANGDirectorPrinceton Gerrymandering ProjectPrinceton, New Jersey 
You were right to highlight the disengagement of young British Muslims from the country’s mosques (“Taking on the old guard”, December 8th). Timothy Winter, a lecturer in Islamic studies at Cambridge University and a prominent convert to Islam, has referred to British mosques as “race temples”. He isn’t suggesting that they are discriminatory. Rather, their imported ethnoreligious customs and pastiche Indo-Saracenic design are alien, and therefore unwelcoming, to a diverse British Muslim polity. 
Third spaces, such as the one mentioned in your article, are a step in the right direction. Fellow co-religionists in America, such as Roots in Dallas and Ta’leef in Chicago and the Bay Area, have perfected this model through open, inclusive, youth-focused spaces that allow for the critical engagement of Islam in a culturally relevant American context. The Muslim Council of Britain is crucial in implementing best-practice guidelines for mosques, particularly on inclusivity and good governance. This has indeed disrupted British Islam. But transformative change will only occur when this new, more cosmopolitan generation of Muslims displaces the ancien régime currently running the country’s mosques. 
ABDULLAH GEELAHFellow of the WinstonChurchill Memorial TrustLondon 
The symbolism of the gilets jaunes protesting on French traffic roundabouts is deeper than you think (“To the roundabouts”, December 22nd). Most of the roundabouts they took over were not the ronds-points you mentioned but were giratoires. Historically, ronds-points operated on the principle that vehicles already on a roundabout give way to cars that are entering it (priority to the right). These in turn would then have to stop to give way to those driving onto the roundabout at the next entry point. This was a recipe for gridlock. Edging through the stationary traffic to cross the Bastille roundabout in Paris could take half an hour. 
In the early 1980s, testing began of the rond-point anglais. In this English version, those already on the roundabout have priority and those trying to enter it have to give way, which keeps traffic flowing. The unpatriotic title could not be sustained, so they were renamed giratoires. Their success and almost universal adoption means that most French roundabouts nowadays with a few exceptions, such as l’Etoile and Bastille in Paris, are giratoires, not ronds-points. 
For the gilets jaunes protesting on the handful of remaining ronds-points, gridlock may be the best they can hope for. But as Mr Macron has discovered, you have to give way to those on the giratoire. 
ADRIAN ROBSONLondon 
How wonderful to see an article on wild swimming (“Cold comfort”, December 22nd). It captured the unique combination of anxiety and exhilaration you can experience during an open-water swim. We regularly hear from our readers how swimming outdoors has transformed their lives, from simply improving their fitness to helping them cope with stress, finding their way through a bereavement or reducing symptoms of depression. It’s not just the swimming though, it’s also the camaraderie and shared shivers and cake that come with it. 
Your author also mentioned nearly losing her nerve in Wast Water in England’s Lake District and the potential dangers of cold water. Although there are risks, a few simple precautions make outdoor swimming very safe. We have published guidelines on our website and there is more advice on the website of the Outdoor Swimming Society. If you haven’t experienced it yet, read the advice and then add outdoor swimming to your list of things to try in 2019. But maybe wait until it’s a little warmer. 
SIMON GRIFFITHSPublisherOutdoor Swimmer MagazineLondon 
* On reading of the recent transition from feudalism to democracy on the island of Sark (December 15), I looked for Sark on Google Earth and found a green mosaic of fields and pastures, surrounded in all by cliffs of amphibolite and gneiss dropping a hundred meters to the sea. My first impulse (natural to me, but then I had never really thought about it) was to search that castle wall of a coast for places to swim. I found a few rocky beaches tucked among the cliffs, so I imagined myself there, easing into the cool blue-green water of the English Channel. 
The next day, your Christmas issue arrived with an article on the quest for wild swimming. I did not know that it is a thing, that it has a name, or that it even has a sort of literary hero. But all my life I have known the siren song of this wild swimming. From icy waters of Lake Superior and midge-guarded ponds of the Scottish Highlands to warm clear currents of the Caribbean and the papyrus-lined streams of the Okavango Delta, to swim someplace is to weave it into my being in a way no photograph or souvenir could ever evoke.Or maybe that’s just the endolphins talking.KURT BOWDENTraverse City, Michigan 
The growing Somali community in Minnesota (“A tale of two cafés”, January 5th) reminded me of another stubborn group of immigrants to that state: Norwegians. The waves of Norwegian immigrants that started to arrive in Minnesota in the late 19th century tended to be poor, rural and uneducated, often with no knowledge of English. They established their own schools and churches, opened restaurants that specialised in delicacies from back home, such as lutefisk, cod preserved with lye. And in the middle of a neighbourhood in Minneapolis that has become a revitalised centre for Somali immigrants, lies a Norwegian church that still has a service in Norwegian every Sunday. 
JOHANNES MAURITZENTrondheim, Norway 
I loved your piece on the bubble in emu farming during the 1990s (“An investment that never took off”, December 22nd). I grew up in rural Georgia in a log cabin built by my father and we had a ranch of 100 emus. When the bubble popped, we continued to raise them and use them as a personal food source. My parents no longer own any emus but it was my first experience with the effect of macro markets on everyday life. I am now an investment portfolio manager, so I have come full circle. 
CALEB CRONICJacksonville, Florida 
* Letters appear online only 
