###### No clarity in Cairo
# Business this week 
> Jan 10th 2019 
Carlos Ghosn appeared in public for the first time since being taken into custody in mid-November amid claims of wrongdoing, which led to his dismissal as Nissan’s chairman. Mr Ghosn appeared at a court in Tokyo where he denied all the allegations, which include a “breach of trust” at Nissan and understating his pay to the authorities. He described the claims as “meritless”. The court nevertheless recommended that he remain in custody. See article. 
Ford announced a root-and-branch restructuring of its operations in Europe, a loss-making region for the carmaker. Thousands of jobs are expected to go. Jaguar Land Rover prepared its workers for huge job losses in Britain.  
Samsung said that it expects its operating profit for the last three months of 2018 to be significantly lower than expected, its first decline in quarterly profit in two years. The South Korean electronics giant blamed weaker demand in China, a factor that lay behind Apple’s recent warning about decreased revenues. 
The unemployment rate in the euro area dipped to 7.9% in November, the lowest it has been since October 2008. The youth unemployment rate stood at 16.9%, but remained much higher in Greece, Italy and Spain. 
American employers added 312,000 jobs to the payrolls in December, exceeding forecasts and capping a year in which the most jobs were created since 2015, thanks in part to tax cuts. As the labour market tightens, wages are rising as employers vie for workers. Average hourly earnings were up by 3.2% year on year. 
The good news on jobs sent stockmarkets soaring following a month of turbulence. Investors were also buoyed by assurances from Jerome Powell, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, that the central bank would take a “flexible” approach both to interest-rate rises and winding down the assets it accrued through quantitative easing, a softening of the remarks he made after the Fed’s recent meeting. 
Negotiators from America and China wrapped up their first round of talks since a truce was called in the two countries’ trade dispute. The mood at the talks was said to be positive, with China making more concessions to deal with American complaints. Both sides are working towards beating a deadline of March 1st, after which America threatens to raise its tariffs significantly if the issues aren’t resolved. 
Bristol-Myers Squibb agreed to buy Celgene, a specialist in drugs that tackle cancer. The takeover, worth around $90bn, is one of the biggest ever in the pharmaceuticals industry. See article. 
The announcement that Jeff Bezos and his wife are to divorce raised questions about his stake in Amazon. Mr Bezos married MacKenzie in 1993, a year before he founded the e-commerce company. He holds a 16.3% stake in Amazon, but if Mrs Bezos gets half of that she could carry considerable clout. The two next-biggest shareholders each have stakes of around 5%. 
Amazon became the world’s most valuable publicly listed company when its market capitalisation at the close of trading ended up above Microsoft’s. Microsoft had only just regained the crown from Apple, which has seen its share price tumble over worries about its growth prospects. Amazon is now worth around $800bn, much less than the $1trn valuation it hit (along with Apple) in the middle of last year. 
SoftBank was reported to have slashed the amount it was thinking of investing in WeWork, which provides shared-office space in 96 cities around the world, from $16bn to $2bn. The Japanese tech conglomerate is said to have been nervous about making such a large commitment, which would have been the largest ever in a tech startup, amid a slump in technology stocks. WeWork, meanwhile, rebranded itself as the We Company. 
The share price of Pacific Gas & Electric, California’s biggest energy provider, plunged amid speculation that it might declare bankruptcy. The company is being investigated in relation to the outbreak of wildfires in 2017-18, the deadliest in the state’s history. PG&E will have to fork out billions of dollars in damages if its power lines are found to have contributed to the infernos, even if it observed strict safety rules. See article. 
Jim Yong Kim decided to step down as president of the World Bank, three years before the end of his second term. Following the convention that America gets to select the head of the World Bank (and Europeans get to choose the leader of the IMF), Mr Kim was nominated for the job by Barack Obama. Mr Kim’s appointment was the first to be challenged by candidates from developing countries. Such opposition may intensify with Donald Trump in the White House. See article. 
