###### The future
# Mr Modi must reassure Indians that he is committed to democracy 
> print-edition iconPrint edition | Special report | Oct 24th 2019 
IN A small town in Gujarat in the early 1960s, the teenage son of a local grocer staged a school play. It was about a Dalit mother whose son falls ill. No doctor will treat the “untouchable” child. Even a priest shoos away the woman when she begs for the flowers that worshippers offer to the gods, which are said to have healing powers. At last he relents and hands her a single yellow bud. 
The young playwright was Narendra Modi and the story gives an early hint at his desire to improve the lot of India’s most downtrodden. The problem is that, even though he now has the power to do much more than hand out flowers, he still seems to prefer symbol over substance. 
That is not to say that the lives of dalits have not improved. In Sapawada, a village near Mr Modi’s home town, half a dozen Dalit families share a narrow alley. Ramesh, a day labourer, says that being an untouchable used to be brutal. Now, though, Dalit women are seldom molested or kidnapped. Their children have long since been allowed to go to the village temple and government school. Yet they are still told to sit at the back of class and ask no questions, so they fall behind. Other streets in the village have piped water, and toilets too, except for the dalits’ lane, which relies on wells and the neighbouring fields. “They still expect us to do demeaning work like removing carcasses,” says Ramesh. The nearby Honda and Suzuki plants hire dalits only for cleaning jobs. 
Across the country and up and down the caste scale, the experience of progress is similar. Everywhere there is improvement, but much hardship and injustice remains. More dramatically than in America or even China, India’s new wealth has accumulated disproportionately at the very top of the pile. Asia’s richest man, Mukesh Ambani, lives in a $1bn, 27-storey Mumbai town house and sends out invitations to his daughter’s wedding costing $4,000 each, about as much as four poor rural families spend in a year. 
For all too many, the experience of Indian democracy has been of promises made and broken. Mr Modi, as all but his bitterest critics admit, has made bigger, more effective efforts to expand the reach of government help than any previous prime minister. But he has also made bigger promises. The 230m Indians who voted for him now expect him to honour them. They want better living standards, more access to clean water, decent education and health services. They want honest government, impartial justice and a strong India. 
India’s new wealth has accumulated disproportionately at the very top 
Will Mr Modi use his massive mandate to bring them a better life? With India in a deepening, self-inflicted economic slump, the answer hangs on which version of the prime minister they get: a reformer determined to use his power to unleash India’s potential, or a master manipulator with a much narrower vision of India’s destiny. Unfortunately, judging from his record of six years in power, people are right to be concerned that the prime minister is less likely to raise India’s standard of living than to offer them instead the “yellow flower” of feel-good Hindu majoritarianism. This could do permanent damage to the country. 
Mr Modi’s instinctive authoritarianism threatens many of the freedoms that make his country so successful. One omen of change is that, in a place as famously chatty as India, few people were willing to be quoted by name in this special report. “They are not just telling us to be positive in public any more,” whispers a high-tech tycoon at a fancy Mumbai dinner. “They are dictating what they want us to say.” 
Just now, the hold of Mr Modi’s party is not just impressively strong but potentially suffocating. BJP leaders often say they aim not simply to beat their rival but to make India “Congress-free”. If the BJP were just another secular party, that might not be so worrying. But many parts of the state, from investigative agencies to the once-vaunted Election Commission to national media and even the Supreme Court, now seem to move according to Mr Modi’s script. Despairing at patronage from their own parties, opposition politicians have defected in droves. “If we opened our doors completely, no one would remain outside,” jokes Amit Shah, the home minister. 
Though Mr Modi speaks proudly of Indian democracy, Mr Shah has raised eyebrows by criticising the “weakness” of the multiparty system. More controversial still is his insistence that, following in the steps of Assam, a state that declared 2m of its residents to be non-citizens and is building camps to intern them, the experiment of creating a national register there should become nationwide. Minorities, especially Muslims, fear the focus of a massive citizenship sweep would be on them. The government’s popular, though constitutionally questionable, moves in Kashmir, and the Supreme Court’s failure to challenge them, have not helped. 
Indian democracy is being undermined in other ways. Back in 2014, Mr Modi’s most loudly proclaimed promise was to tackle corruption. Fewer top-level scams have emerged under his rule, and several high-profile cases—typically involving political foes of the BJP—have indeed gone to court. But low-level, rent-seeking graft is still pervasive. 
A “reform” of Mr Modi’s, the introduction of anonymous electoral bonds that place no limit on how much donors can lavish on political parties, simply legalises influence-buying. An independent watchdog group suggests that some 95% of these bonds have gone to the BJP. And if the proportion of elected officials with criminal records—currently 43% of MPs—is anything to go by, the nexus between politics and money is as strong as ever. 
India remains a fiercely pluralist country, with a noisy and passionate opposition. But the balance of power has now shifted massively to one end of the spectrum. This places extra responsibility on Mr Modi. He can still choose whether to continue pursuing politics as a zero-sum game, where the winner takes all, or to recognise that it is healthier for India to have a level playing field. The vast majority of Indians want firm leadership and support Mr Modi. But they would be happier if he attended to things that need fixing rather than things that are not broken. And they would be dismayed if he ends up breaking their democracy—one of the things that makes all Indians rightfully proud. ■ 
