###### On the World Bank, Labour, Virginia, vaccinations, John Ruskin, pisco, lifts
# Letters 
##### Letters to the editor 
> Feb 14th 2019 
You are right that Donald Trump could have picked a less-qualified American than David Malpass to lead the World Bank, but you are wrong in thinking that the rest of the world should sigh with relief, hold its nose and accept him (“A qualified pass”, February 9th). Nominations for the job are open for another month. Until then, the shareholders, and The Economist, should keep an open mind. When all the candidates are known, the bank’s board can assess them against the qualifications it has agreed on, which does not include being the candidate nominated by America. 
In the 21st century the World Bank will have a useful future only if it can evolve into a club of countries with the resources and legitimacy to tackle a growing list of shared challenges such as climate change, financial instability, the refugee crisis, pandemics and boosting investment to build prosperity. The informal bargain that lets America decide who should lead the bank was an anachronism even when it was struck more than 70 years ago. It should now be consigned to history, especially as the bank no longer depends on American financing. The Europeans may worry that they will therefore lose the right to nominate the head of the IMF: good. Both institutions deserve better. 
OWEN BARDERCentre for Global DevelopmentLondon 
Regarding “¡Hasta la victoria Corbynista!” (February 2nd), the overthrow in 1973 of the democratically elected socialist president of Chile, Salvador Allende, had a profound impact on the British labour movement. Such was the strength of feeling that the Wilson and Callaghan Labour governments (1974-79) took the unusual step of imposing a unilateral British arms embargo on the Pinochet regime, as well as withdrawing Britain’s ambassador from Santiago and welcoming thousands of Chilean refugees to Britain. It was an early example of an “ethical” foreign policy. 
The support of the United States for Pinochet’s coup, as well as for military governments in Brazil, Uruguay and Argentina—regimes responsible for the disappearance of thousands of their own citizens—helps explain the scepticism of the left, both in Britain and Latin America, about Donald Trump’s motives in Venezuela today. 
GRACE LIVINGSTONECentre of Latin American StudiesUniversity of Cambridge 
To say that the scandals involving Virginia’s top three elected officials, all Democrats, began with Governor Ralph Northam’s “clumsily worded defence of a loosening restriction on abortion” is an understatement (“These are the breaks”, February 9th). Mr Northam actually suggested that a child could be aborted after birth, outside the womb. 
The details are important because during our statewide elections, these men and their supporters lectured Virginians on morality, racism and misogyny. The most memorable example is a political ad that showed a Republican in a pickup truck attempting to run down children from ethnic minorities. Now Mr Northam and Mark Herring, the state attorney-general, are accused of racism for wearing blackface as young men and Justin Fairfax, the lieutenant-governor, faces claims of sexual assault. 
Neither party has a monopoly on moral duplicity. But the seeds of our local scandals were planted long before the governor’s abortion gaffe. They were sown when these particular politicians pontificated about morality during their bids for office. Their immaturity and insensitivity as young men does not disqualify our governor or attorney-general from leadership. Neither does the accusation of sexual assault without an investigation disqualify our lieutenant-governor. Nor are the three men’s hypocrisy legal grounds to dismiss them. But a second woman has accused Mr Fairfax of sexual assault and all three men vow to remain in office. I’m making more popcorn. 
JOHN BLAIRFairfax, Virginia 
Public health across Europe is indeed being damaged by the populist campaign against vaccination (Charlemagne, January 19th). These are developed economies where information is easily available, and where parents are increasingly apprehensive about vaccinating their children. The Syriza-led government in Greece has contributed to this by legislating in a manner that enhances the “me-first libertarianism and anti-expertise herd mentality” that Charlemagne described. In September 2018 the Ministry of Health issued a circular allowing parents who do not want to vaccinate their children to opt-out for personal reasons, despite the fact that child vaccination has been mandatory since 1999. With this laissez-faire approach the Greek government has outperformed the demagoguery of even the Italian Five Star Movement. The decision is peculiar given that Syriza favours robust state intervention in other policy areas. 
There are compelling reasons why governments should require vaccinations for all children, rather than leaving it to parents to decide. After an absence of several decades, last year Greece saw the return of measles with 3,500 confirmed cases and four deaths. The government is exposing its citizens to preventable infectious diseases. This fails one of the core functions of the state, the provision of public goods. It fails in particular to establish a herd immunity, which ensures a level of vaccination coverage that is adequate to prevent a disease from spreading and thus protect people who cannot be vaccinated: those with impaired immune systems, the elderly or simply the most vulnerable. 
DR DOMNA MICHAILIDOUAthens 
It’s a pity that Bagehot’s column on what we can learn from John Ruskin (February 9th) didn’t take the opportunity to plug “John Ruskin: The Power of Seeing”, an exhibition at Two Temple Place, a remarkable venue in London. It bears out all that Bagehot says. 
DAVID BENTLEYLondon 
Bello’s column about cherries from Chile was wonderful (January 19th). Except for the part where it inaccurately labelled Peru’s pisco as a grappa. Pisco from Peru is a brandy, most closely resembling cognac. Grappa uses stems, seeds and skins (referred to as pomace) in its production. Pisco has no additives; that not only includes no pomace, but also covers an absence of added sugars or colouring, which explains why it is rested in clear non- reactive vessels rather than aged in wood. 
FRANCINE COHENNew York 
Reading about the placebo effect on pedestrians of buttons at road crossings (“A pressing problem”, January 26th) I am reminded of the close-door button in lifts, which has been made inoperative in many buildings around the world. The idea that these elevator buttons could also raise people’s hopes is wrong on so many levels. 
ANURAG CHATRATHMukteshwar, India 
