###### Letters
# Letters to the editor 
##### On Brexit, Donald Trump, banks, hydrocarbons, suicide, MPs 
> Jan 5th 2019 
I agree with holding a second referendum, as was argued in “The best way out of the Brexit mess” (December 8th). However I do not think Remain should be an option. I am a staunch Remainer myself, but I worry about the greater damage populism could inflict on Britain if we, in effect, tell those who voted for Brexit that they are stupid and should try again. We saw what happened with the election of Donald Trump and the first Brexit referendum. Calling people racists and ignorant only emboldens populist sentiment. 
On the ballot in 2016, the question we were asked was whether Britain should remain a member of the European Union. The word “leave” was on the ballot paper, but since it provided no explanation of what this meant, we have to assume that it means “leave” in the context of membership. 
But we should now hold a second referendum offering the people the choice of what our non-membership of the EU should look like. This will force both Remainers and Leavers into making concessions. They should be offered the choice of Theresa May’s package, the Norway model, the Turkey model, the Switzerland model, and leaving on WTO terms. Since these are technical questions, it will be much harder for populists to hijack the debate and force emotional issues upon it. 
FRASER BUFFINIPristina, Kosovo 
The significant legal question concerning any charges that may be brought against Donald Trump is whether he will brazenly act on the claim that he has the absolute right to pardon himself from criminal jeopardy (“Mueller, she wrote”, December 8th). The constitution’s limitations on the pardon power apply only to federal offences. Constitutional textualists, who focus on the plain meaning of the text, might agree with Mr Trump’s interpretation that it covers other matters, but the argument has never been considered by federal court. 
This interpretation is wrong. In a democracy, allowing the pardon power to be used for self-protection creates an inherent conflict of interest and undermines confidence in the rule of law. It is also inconsistent with the constitutional provision that the president take care that the laws be faithfully executed. Whether President Trump would resign and accept a pardon from his successor, which would be a reprise of the Ford-Nixon pardon, is another matter. 
JOHN MINANProfessor of law, emeritusUniversity of San Diego 
The suggestion in “Homing in” (December 1st) that non-bank lenders in America pose a harm to the housing-finance system and economy is unfounded. Independent mortgage companies and non-depository institutions play an important role in lending to creditworthy borrowers. If they hadn’t stepped up their efforts in the years after the great recession home sales and prices would have been slower to recover. Many first-time buyers, members of the armed forces, moderate-income borrowers and minority households would have found themselves locked out of home ownership. The majority of non-bank mortgage lenders are appropriately capitalised for the risks they take. Furthermore, most of the post-crisis regulations that traditional banks must follow also apply to these firms. Counterparties such as Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac as well as state regulators, also enforce guidelines and provide significant additional oversight. 
Regardless of the source of mortgage credit, risky products have been removed in today’s mortgage market. Careful underwriting ensures that borrowers have the ability to repay their mortgages. That is a big reason why overall mortgage-delinquency rates are hovering below 5%, near all-time lows. 
BOB BROEKSMITPresident and CEOMortgage Bankers AssociationWashington, DC 
Regarding your Technology quarterly on decarbonising the global economy (December 1st), there is much talk of the alternative energy carriers and their associated logistical networks that can replace hydrocarbons. Hydrogen is one, but other compounds, such as ammonia or methanol continue to be considered. But there is no reason why a net zero carbon system cannot be based upon the same hydrocarbon fuels and infrastructure that power society today. The key difference is that they would be synthetic hydrocarbons (rather than the naturally occurring variety) built from a carbon recycling system where CO2 is pulled from the air and reacted with hydrogen to form a drop-in fuel that can be used in natural-gas heating systems, cars, trucks, or planes. 
There are two reasons why synthetic hydrocarbons are downplayed. First is the incorrect thinking that a net zero carbon society must use an energy carrier that does not contain carbon. Educating policymakers on this point is a must. The second is that synthetic hydrocarbons are more expensive on a unit basis than simply using hydrogen. The latter point is true, but should be an impetus for R&D. 
Synthetic hydrocarbons are compelling for pragmatic reasons. By developing “drop-in” substitutes, the hydrocarbon users and logistic system—cars, pipelines and so on—can be used as is. The unit cost of the fuel is more expensive, but the large upfront cost of replacing the hydrocarbon system is largely averted. Moreover, all those cars, pipelines and chemical facilities have voters and political interests behind them. By making them part of the solution, rather than left out in the cold, you obtain a coalition with its interests preserved in the new low carbon world. 
If we had the luxury of building the energy system from scratch, hydrogen would play a big role. Substitutes that can slot into existing systems are the ones we should collectively pursue. 
PROFESSOR TIM LIEUWENGeorgia Institute of TechnologyAtlanta 
You propose that the state should make suicide more difficult (“Staying alive”, November 24th). I disagree. In a Darwinian sense we want to live only because evolution produces only things that want to live, be they bacteria or Nobel prize-winning scientists. Things that don’t want to live disappear from the world and those that are left therefore think that continuing to live is their prime imperative. For the individual that doesn’t want to live, suicide is logical and rational. 
STEPHEN KINGFarnham, Surrey 
“Knights become pawns” (December 1st) suggests that the minimum level of competence for an MP to hold a government job in Britain has fallen below the one outlined by Sir Humphrey Appleby in “Yes, Minister”. According to Sir Humphrey, if a party has just over 300 seats in the House of Commons it can form a government. Out of these MPs, 100 are too old or too silly to be ministers and 100 are too young or too callow. Therefore there is virtually no competition for the 100 government posts available. 
JOHAN ENEGRENDanderyd, Sweden 
