###### When Donny met Nancy
# The world this week 
> Jan 3rd 2019 
James Mattis spent his last day in office as America’s defence secretary. Mr Mattis decided to step down after Donald Trump unilaterally announced the withdrawal of American troops from Syria. (Mr Trump also said he would downsize America’s deployment to Afghanistan, but he appears to have changed his mind.) Mr Mattis had wanted to stay until February, but Mr Trump gave him a week to clear his desk. See article. 
Mr Trump’s decision to withdraw from Syria was felt across the Middle East. Bashar al-Assad, Syria’s dictator, welcomed it, as did his Russian and Iranian backers. America’s Kurdish allies, feeling betrayed, asked Mr Assad to protect them from a looming offensive by Turkey. And Arab countries that loathe Mr Assad quickly tried to make up with him. See article. 
Binyamin Netanyahu, Israel’s prime minister, called for an election to be held on April 9th, seven months earlier than originally scheduled. Many see this as an attempt by Mr Netanyahu to head off possible corruption charges. See article. 
Elizabeth Warren became the first heavy-hitter to enter the race for the Democratic Party’s presidential nomination in 2020. The senator from Massachusetts favours higher taxes, universal health care and 40% of seats on company boards reserved for workers. 
Jair Bolsonaro, a former army captain and apologist for military rule, took office as Brazil’s president. Addressing congress, he proposed a “national pact” to overcome “the yoke of corruption, criminality” and “economic irresponsibility”. In a more combative speech to a crowd of 100,000, he said he would free Brazil from “socialism, inverted values, the bloated state and political correctness”. See article. 
Emmanuel Macron, France’s president, vowed to press on with reform despite the gilets jaunes protests that have paralysed much of the country. Protesters vowed to block more roads and light more bonfires. 
Elections were held in the Democratic Republic of Congo two years after they were supposed to have taken place. The vote was marred by intimidation. As results were awaited, the internet was turned off to make it harder for voters to complain. See article. 
Thousands protested in Sudan over rising food prices and the despotic rule of Omar al-Bashir, who has run the country since taking power in a military coup in 1989. Government forces shot dozens. 
The death toll from the recent tsunami in Indonesia stood at 430, with more than 14,000 injured. The tsunami was caused by a slope on a volcano sliding into the sea during an eruption. New cracks have appeared on the mountain. See article. 
Bangladesh’s ruling party, the Awami League, won a third five-year term in an election the opposition denounced as a farce. The party and its allies won all but 11 of the 299 seats contested, an even bigger landslide than in the previous election, which the opposition had boycotted. See article. 
Japan said it would defy an international ban and restart commercial whaling in its territorial waters, although it promised to stop whaling near Antarctica. See article. 
China’s leader, Xi Jinping, said his country “must and will be united” with Taiwan and didnot rule out the use of force to achieve this. Taiwan’s president, Tsai Ing-wen, said the island would “never accept” China’s offer of “one country, two systems”. 
America’s New Horizons spacecraft flew past Ultima Thule. Thule, which is part of the Kuiper belt of asteroids beyond the orbit of Neptune, is the most distant object visited by a machine. It proved to be 33km long and snowman-shaped. Meanwhile, closer to home, China also achieved a first in space: a Chinese robot rover, Chang’e-4, landed on the “dark” side of the Moon invisible from Earth. See article. 
Following December’s tumultuous trading, stockmarkets fell again at the start of 2019. Last year was the worst for markets since the financial crash. The S&P 500 was down by 6% over the year, the FTSE 100 by 12%, the NASDAQ by 4%, and both the Nikkei and Euro Stoxx 50 by 14%. But it was China’s stockmarkets that took the biggest hammering. The CSI 300 index fell by 25%. See article. 
The rout is in part a response to the tightening of monetary policy by the Federal Reserve. Last month the Fed raised its benchmark interest rate for the fourth time in 2018, to a range of between 2.25% and 2.5%, but suggested it would lift rates just twice this year. See article. 
Investors were further unnerved this week by Apple’s warning that revenues in the last three months of 2018 were much weaker than it had forecast, because of lower sales in China and because people aren’t upgrading their iPhones as frequently as before. Tesla’s share price took a knock, after it delivered fewer Model 3 cars in the fourth quarter than markets had expected. 
A Japanese court approved a request to keep Carlos Ghosn in custody while prosecutors continue to question him. Mr Ghosn was sacked by Nissan as its chairman amid allegations that he misstated his pay. He was recently “re-arrested”—without ever being released—over new allegations of shifting a private investment loss onto Nissan’s books. 
