###### On economists, Colombia, Syria, Stanley Baldwin, the Bible, China, Tories
# Letters to the editor 
> Sep 28th 2019 
Economists helped shape American policy and public attitudes well before the 1950s (“The numbers guys”, August 31st). This is exemplified by the rise of national-income accounting in the late 1920s, the influx of economists into Franklin Roosevelt’s wartime government, the Employment Act of 1946, which created the Council of Economic Advisers, the Committee for Economic Development’s influential policy books in the 1940s, and the sharp rise in economics PhDs in the late 1940s. Before that, John Commons, the president of the American Economic Association, urged colleagues to assist federal agencies during the first world war. The National Bureau of Economic Research, founded in 1920, embarked on the first systematic efforts to gauge national income and study business cycles. 
ANDREW YARROWWashington, DC 
It is simplistic to blame the collective ownership of Afro-Colombian lands for the poverty in Colombia’s Pacific coast region (“No-man’s land”, August 31st). We have evaluated the effect of collective property on development in the area, comparing Afro-Colombian communities who have collective land titles with those who have none. Collective titling significantly reduces extreme poverty, increases mean household income, improves children’s school attendance in primary education and promotes housing investment. 
Holding a stake in collective property indicates to inhabitants that theirs is no longer a “no-man’s land” and motivates investment. There are still sizeable gaps in socio-economic indicators between Colombia’s Pacific and the rest of the country, but without collective titling the situation would be even worse. 
You further claim that the right to prior consultation in the region delays the provision of public goods, again, with no empirical evidence. In fact, I have noticed the opposite. During negotiations, communities demand public goods that the Colombian state has failed to provide. You conclude by pointing out that not everyone shares the government’s idea of “progress” for the region. Here, we agree. It is untenable to endorse a view of progress that ignores local governance merely for the benefit of a few people. 
Indeed, the law from 1993 establishing collective land titling and the right to prior consultation constitute the only noteworthy government policies favouring Afro-Colombian communities since the country’s abolition of slavery in 1851. 
MARIA ALEJANDRA VéLEZProfessor of economicsLos Andes UniversityBogotá 
You say that the West should offer Syria “strictly humanitarian assistance” (“Assad’s hollow victory”, September 7th). There is evidence that humanitarian assistance to Syria has systematically been distributed only in areas loyal to Bashar al-Assad. The concentration of UN operations in Damascus only makes the matter worse. Many other conflicts that featured extensive civilian suffering, including the famine in Ethiopia during the 1980s, were marked by the political distribution of aid, which extended the length and cost of war. It is a morally difficult choice to withhold assistance from those in need, but in the case of Mr Assad’s regime it is the correct one, regardless of the form of foreign assistance. 
JESSICA TRISKO DARDENAssistant professor of international affairsAmerican UniversityWashington, DC 
Medical infrastructure and staff have been systematically targeted by the Assad government and its Russian allies in their brutal strategy of war. We have corroborated 583 attacks on at least 350 separate health facilities as well as the killing of 912 medical personnel between March 2011 and August 2019, using a highly conservative methodology. More than 90% of these attacks were perpetrated by the Syrian government and its allies. 
Among other efforts to end impunity for war crimes in Syria, it is imperative that the UN’s investigation into such attacks be conducted without delay and its findings made public. It should assign culpability for these heinous acts. Hospitals should never become death traps. 
SUSANNAH SIRKINDirector of policyPhysicians for Human RightsNew York 
I was disappointed by the omission of Stanley Baldwin from your list of British prime ministers who have headed governments of national unity (“Of gnus and other animals”, August 31st). The contrast between Boris Johnson and his interwar predecessor is stark. 
Baldwin devoted much of his leadership to combating populist politics and powerful press barons, which he viewed as existential threats to Britain’s system of parliamentary governance. He agreed to participate in forming a national government in 1935 rather than taking advantage of the fragmentation of other parties in the House of Commons, believing that all parliamentarians have a duty to place country over party. 
LEX RAYLondon 
Your review of Tom Holland’s “Dominion” makes the assertion that “the Bible is a big and incoherent book” (“The cross’s shadow”, August 31st). Actually, the Bible is a collection of scores of books, a mixture of histories, letters, biography, song and more. The sense of incoherence comes from not understanding the contextual situation of each book and the type of literature, giving rise to puzzlement, occasional strangeness and difficulty. 
Yes, people have used verses out of context to support all kinds of monstrous positions, but what part of humanity has not been used for the purposes of warped political and social ends? 
RUPERT HIGGINSBournemouth, Dorset 
Chaguan reported that “only two decades ago, officials insisted there were no gay men in China” and that “censors have stepped up efforts to shield Chinese audiences from depictions of gay life” (September 7th). Xi Jinping constantly urges his countrymen to remember their historical and Confucian roots. An early emperor of the Han dynasty, Ai, cut off the sleeve of his robe rather than awaken his male lover, Dong Xian, who had fallen asleep in his arms, hence the Chinese expression, “cut-sleeve love.” There are indeed gay men in China, and there always have been. 
MICHAEL ARKINToronto 
Bagehot described the Conservative Party membership as mostly “over 55 years old, 70% are men, 97% are white and, as a group, they have far more authoritarian and Eurosceptic views than the population at large” (September 7th). That seems like a pretty good description of the outgoing European Commission. All right, except for the Eurosceptic bit, but the rest of the characteristics are uncannily similar. 
NEIL WOODAylesford, Kent 
