###### On Huawei, Gaelic, light, Iran, doctors, work
# Letters 
##### Letters to the editor 
> Feb 23rd 2019 
“How to handle Huawei” (February 2nd) was right in saying that “aggressive action” against the telecoms-equipment maker “would come with huge costs for all, including America”. Take Britain, for example. Over the past five years, Huawei has brought £2bn ($2.6bn) to the country and created 7,500 jobs. The company has pledged a further £3bn in investment and procurement in the coming five years. You were also right that “the exclusion of a firm on the say-so of American officials, without evidence of spying, would set a dangerous precedent”. Discrediting a company without any concrete evidence misleads the public, violates rules of commerce and damages business confidence. The right approach is to be rational towards foreign companies and support fair competition. The Chinese government encourages Chinese firms doing business abroad to contribute to the local economy and society and operate within international regulations and local laws. 
Moreover, the National Intelligence Law is aimed at improving the legal system relating to national security. Chinese laws and regulations do not authorise any firm, including Huawei, to build back doors to network systems. The British government keeps an eye on Huawei’s operations through the Cyber Security Evaluation Centre, whose reports show no evidence of any problem involving back doors. 
ZENG RONGSpokesperson of the Chinese embassyLondon 
I enjoyed your article on the demography of the Irish in Britain (“Last waltz in Kilburn”, February 9th). However, there were a few tell-tale signs that you are more used to Scottish traditions, such as their “whisky” and “ceilidh”. Next time your correspondent is in Ireland we’ll treat him to some whiskey at a proper Irish céilí! 
AIDAN CLERKINDublin 
It is wrong to assume that the only benefit that matters in the cost-benefit calculus of providing Africans with solar electricity is improving incomes (“Light to all nations?”, February 9th). Even your article acknowledges that Rwandans with solar lamps lit their households more brightly, burned less kerosene and their children studied a bit more. Isn’t that enough to warrant support? Isn’t it enough for children to be able to study at night without potentially damaging their lungs from kerosene smoke? I suspect these are the reasons why people in rich countries value light. Low-income families who use these solar lanterns buy them not because it makes their lives richer, but because it makes their lives better. We should all be so enlightened. 
ALEXANDER SOTIRIOUMATTHEW SOURSOURIANConsultative Group to Assist the PoorWashington, DC 
* It is true that Thomas Edison began selling filament light bulbs 140 years ago. But that is only half the story. Edison patented his incandescent light bulb in 1879, but the design was only an improvement on Joseph Swan’s invention ten years earlier, which was used to light the first house in the world with electric bulbs. Edison and Swan cross-licensed their designs and formed the Edison and Swan company to market them. This is not the first time you have given all the credit to Edison with no mention of Swan’s contribution. I also prefer Swan’s bayonet-fitting bulb connection to Edison’s screw fitting, as it is much less likely to work loose.JOHN DAKINMalpas, Cheshire 
You criticised American sanctions against Iran because they hit most Iranians (“How to deal with the mullahs”, February 9th). Yet sanctions have an insignificant effect on poverty. A bigger factor is the regime’s redistribution of wealth to the elite. Poverty has plagued Iranians since the revolution in 1979. This did not change when the nuclear deal struck between world powers and the regime in 2015 opened the country up to trade. In fact the deal gave the regime access to billions of dollars, consolidating its power. With this new-found money, it has reinforced and modernised its repressive security apparatus to carry out terror operations inside and outside Iran. 
You also claimed that few ordinary Iranians are ready to die trying to overthrow the mullahs. Various uprisings, such as the student revolt in 1999, the uprising after the 2009 elections and the unrest in 2017 and 2018 show that many Iranians are so fed up with the Islamic regime that they are ready to sacrifice their lives. The selfless efforts of those Iranians to overthrow the regime will only be made harder if the regime grows stronger because of the normalisation of trade relations with the free world. 
ARVIN KHOSHNOODLund, Sweden 
Your leader provided some practical suggestions on how to deal with Iran. It closely followed Henry Kissinger’s advice in “World Order”, published in 2014: 
Alas, President Trump’s unilateral withdrawal of America from the nuclear deal not only rejected the above, but also worsened everything, domestically and internationally. It will force Iran to continue to behave as “a cause” and not as “a country.” 
NAJMEDIN MESHKATIFellowProject on Managing the Atom Belfer CentreHarvard UniversityCambridge, Massachusetts 
You reported on the hope that online tools will divert patients from overstretched general-practitioner (GP) doctors (“A doctor in your pocket”, February 2nd). But there is little evidence that any existing algorithm can achieve this safely. Our experience with askmyGP is that the key to any online system is enabling family doctors to triage patient requests before offering time-consuming face-to-face appointments. Automatically diverting demand away from GPs is unimportant. 
Furthermore, we know from more than 150,000 patient contacts over the past six months in about 30 practices that the overall level of demand does not increase by making it easier for patients to contact their GP, as your article speculates might happen. We also know that just 1% of patients choose video when offered it, suggesting that it is misguided to think that video contact is important. 
DR STEPHEN BLACKChief analystAskmy GPBiggleswade, Bedfordshire 
##### FOMOs v JOMOs 
I appreciated Bartleby’s piece (February 2nd) on the two tribes of working life: the FOMOs (those who have a fear of missing out) and the JOMOs (who relish the joy of missing out). As a card-carrying JOMO, if ever I feel guilty for not attending a networking event, it cheers me to remember that “networking” is only one letter away from “not working” 
RUFINO HURTADOWashington, DC 
* Letters appear online only 
