###### On cash, the railways, Canada, Venezuela, Wilhelm II, harmony, contracts
# Letters to the editor 
> Aug 31st 2019 
You cheered the fact that rich countries are becoming cashless (“The dash from cash”, August 3rd). Yet one of the largest benefits of physical cash is that it prevents overspending. Psychologically, it is more difficult for someone to hand over cash than to tap or swipe a bank card. One is much more aware of the act of parting from a physical item of value, and therefore more mindful of how much has been spent. Banks are increasingly providing a variety of spending-management tools to help people keep track of their money when they use digital-cash services. The best method of managing spending would be to encourage people to start carrying and using cash again. 
EVAN BYRNELondon 
Richard Thaler, who won the Nobel prize for economics in 2017, has shown that people spend at least twice as much with credit cards than with cash. Modern society is growing ever more complex. The phasing out of cash should be discouraged. 
RODOLFO DE LUCABuenos Aires 
Those who advocate digitising everything do not recognise that life is full of nuance. Wallets get lost, but so do phones with digital wallets (which can also break). At 62 I want to be able to delegate errands. I don’t want my young grandson to have a card until he is ready to face up to the obligations of using one. Some people will never cope without cash, because of illness, or just a total lack of interest in absorbing more banal mental clutter, such as constantly updating passwords, reviewing transaction printouts or reading tomes of terms and conditions. 
Always keep a little cash around. Diversify. It lowers risk. Plastic is useless when power lines are down. If someone can wire you some cash, on the other hand? 
MARIA ASHOTBrussels 
One of the bugbears of the British rail industry is the perennial search for structural solutions to problems that may not have structural causes. Your article, “Getting back on track” (August 17th), is a case in point. In the 26 years since privatisation the franchising regime has changed little, but rail reliability has fluctuated widely. It improved steadily from 1993 until the Hatfield crash in 2000, which precipitated a sharp decline. It took a long time to recover, but by 2009 Britain had one of the most reliable railways in Europe. It is now back down to dismally low levels. 
Given this varied history, it is difficult to see any strong causal link between franchising and reliability. A more plausible diagnosis is that the railway is suffering from financial and political neglect. Tinkering with the franchising system may attract politicians, but it is unlikely to make the trains run on time. 
MARK LAMBIRTHFormer directorUK Department for TransportPaphos, Cyprus 
It is not often that Canada’s competition law makes it into the global economic discussion, as it did in your special report on Canada (July 27th). As the federal commissioner of competition, I was grateful to talk to The Economist about how innovation is reshaping our economy. And I was happy to share thoughts about how we promote competition. 
You reported that, “unlike authorities in other rich countries” Canada’s Competition Bureau “cannot compel firms to provide information.” It is true that Canada cannot compel information for market studies. However, we do use available tools, including applications to our federal courts, to compel firms to provide the information we are seeking in enforcement matters. We also discussed Canada’s efficiencies defence, whereby increased efficiencies attributable to a merger may be used as a defence against the merger’s anti-competitive effects. Your report included my comment that the principle of allowing anti-competitive mergers should be, “at the very least” limited to exporting companies. More precisely, it is that the availability of the efficiencies defence should be, at the very least, strictly limited to exporting companies.  
The Competition Bureau is working hard to make sure that a fair, competitive and trustworthy marketplace endures in Canada. 
MATTHEW BOSWELLCommissioner of competitionOttawa* I was disappointed with the way in which your special report on Canada (July 27th) ignored the country’s historic conservatism and accepted the “liberal” definition of Canada as propagated by the Liberal Party, led by Justin Trudeau. 
You reported that the liberal media are concerned that “the angry politics” which put Donald Trump in office could come to Canada. Politically aware Canadians are not at all concerned with this scenario, as it has been artificially concocted to demonise the honourable tradition of conservatism, supported by Canadians whether they vote Conservative or Liberal in federal elections. You quoted strategists from the losing Liberal party in Ontario, such as David Herle, who managed Kathleen Wynne’s campaign, and did not counter this with opinions from the province’s Conservatives, who saw huge support for their proposals. Liberals went from 58 seats to seven; the Ontario Progressive Conservatives surged from 28 to 76. 
Then there was the effort to compare the policies of Andrew Scheer, the Conservative leader, on issues such as climate change, immigration, gun control and foreign policy, to those of Mr Trump. But they are not the same. This is again a false and misleading message from those who oppose the positive and balanced conservatism of the Conservative Party to paint it with the same colours as those of Mr Trump. 
KENN LITTLEBurlington, Canada 
The murals and floor of the airport in Caracas represent much more than just “kinetic art” (“Art that moves”, August 3rd). All Venezuelans who have emigrated have taken a picture of their feet on the broken tiles of Carlos Cruz-Diez’s floor, as we say goodbye. We do not just pause to admire the art. We pause to cry. We pause to linger a few minutes more with our families. Those broken tiles have seen our youth emigrate with nothing but a suitcase and hope. It is powerful art that captures an entire country’s sorrow and longing. 
RICARDO ROSASBasel, Switzerland 
I was surprised to learn that enough of the belongings of the Hohenzollern family had remained in Germany to be subject to legal actions (“Jacobin fury”, August 3rd). Some time after the dethroned Kaiser Wilhelm II was given asylum in the Netherlands in 1918, he purchased Huis Doorn, a villa in the centre of the country. He then miraculously managed to obtain permission from the Weimar Republic to retrieve most of his personal belongings. Since 1956 the villa and its opulent contents have been a charming but often overlooked museum. 
After meeting Hermann Goering, Wilhelm realised the true intentions of the Nazis, and that these did not include the restoration of the German monarchy. He therefore arranged to be interred in a mausoleum on the grounds of Huis Doorn, next to his favourite dachshunds. His final wish that no Nazis or swastikas would be present at his funeral in 1941 was rudely ignored. 
HANS BARNARDAssociate researcherCotsen Institute of ArchaeologyUniversity of California, Los Angeles 
Your report on seating arrangements in parliaments around the world (“Better politics by design”, July 27th) brought to mind the seating of choruses. Traditionally, choruses are clustered in sections: soprano, alto, tenor, bass. Thus, singers can be corralled by their section leaders (by political analogy, party whips) and led by the stronger voices. 
Some conductors, however, like to challenge their choristers by seating them randomly. The choristers’ immediate neighbours are likely to be from sections other than their own, forcing them to tune in to one another. Section leaders have less control, but the chorus is more harmonious. 
DAVID CORBETTExeter, New Hampshire 
Thinking about people’s tendency neither to read nor understand contracts (“Critical conditions”, July 27th) they should always be aware of what’s written down, because while The Large Print Giveth, The Small Print Taketh Away. 
CHRIS MARLERLondon 
* Letters appear online only 
