###### On Kazakhstan, workers, Oregon, Britain, cannabis, ethics, Parkinson’s disease, cherry trees, Facebook
# Letters to the editor 
##### A selection of correspondence 
> Apr 17th 2019 
Far from being a “showman”, Nursultan Nazarbayev, the departing president of Kazakhstan, is a shrewd autocrat who has put his country on the map during his 30-year rule (“A showman exits”, March 23rd). As the World Bank’s energy pointman in the country for 15 years, I witnessed a big contradiction in Mr Nazarbayev’s policies: bold reform orientation in the economy (Kazakhstan’s GDP per person is now on a par with Russia’s) coupled with soft political dictatorship (earning a “not free” status in democracy from Freedom House). 
As you rightly noted, even after his resignation, Mr Nazarbayev will keep pulling the strings as Elbasi, or Leader of the Nation for life, resisting any opening towards democracy. Despite all the simmering social tensions, there are no bright prospects for a “colour revolution” in the country as long as growing petroleum revenues allow the ruling elite to keep its end of the social bargain: a predictable rise in living standards in exchange for limited political change. 
Regarding his real succession plans, Mr Nazarbayev is facing a big dilemma between his daughter, Dariga Nazarbayeva, and Kassym-Zhomart Tokayev, the interim president and a professional diplomat. Mr Tokayev would ensure a smooth prolongation of his much-praised balanced foreign policy, while Ms Nazarbayeva would safeguard her father’s business empire. 
ISTVAN DOBOZIFormer lead economist at the World BankGaithersburg, Maryland 
Buttonwood’s column on how book value has lost its meaning addressed “the complexity of valuing a firm’s assets in the digital age” (March 23rd). Value, he wrote, “depends on a firm’s capabilities.” He mentioned intangibles such as reputation and “the know-how of staff and relationships with customers and suppliers.” 
One important determinant of many firms’ capabilities is the skills of their employees, which often goes unmeasured. Most firms couldn’t state their return on investment in training or reduction in assets because of staff turnover. Factories, machines, land and office buildings can be counted as capital assets. The more complex, but perhaps equally important, task is valuing a firm’s human resources. 
ARNOLD PACKERFormer chief economist of the Senate Budget CommitteeSan Diego 
I was pleased to read your piece on the growing acceptance of gay politicians in America (“A welcome shrug”, April 6th). However, you labelled Governor Kate Brown of Oregon as “a lesbian”. Actually, she is bisexual, and indeed is happily married to a man with two stepchildren. Prominent bisexuals, such as Freddie Mercury, Aleister Crowley and Ms Brown, are often miscategorised as gay, making it harder for the rest of us to achieve social acceptance. 
THOMAS ROBERTSONOxford 
Britain’s Liberal Democrats can’t make gains if we fail to distinguish ourselves from the “sensible” factions of the Labour Party (“Hope for the hopeless”, March 23rd). Chris Leslie’s statement about the Lib Dems being “tainted by coalition” and therefore impossible to work with sheds light on the ugly truth of how people on the left see the Lib Dems as traitors of a leftist project. Which is why Mr Leslie can work with Anna Soubry but not Jo Swinson. 
To succeed the Lib Dems must embrace liberalism wholeheartedly and abandon our milquetoast attempts at being Tony Blair’s doveish heir. We should embrace liberal principles on free trade and open markets, anti-paternalism and human rights. The Independent Group are welcome to their centrist national service. The Lib Dems have an intelligent policymaking process, dedicated activists and a rich political tradition to build on. But we are not going to be able to capitalise on any of this if we keep trying to be Chuka Umunna, but with legalised weed. 
ARIA BABULiberal ReformLondon 
You reported our research showing the effect of high-potency cannabis on rates of psychosis across Europe (“Strong pot is hot”, March 23rd). The legalisation of recreational cannabis in the United States and Canada represents a huge experiment concerning the effects of cannabis on the brains of young people. Will this lead to an increase in rates of psychosis, or not? Sadly, neither state nor federal governments are carefully monitoring the effect. Perhaps they would rather not know the answer. 
ROBIN MURRAYProfessor of psychiatric researchKing’s CollegeLondon 
The constraints on corporate conduct you listed in “The new age of corporate scandals” (April 6th) were “regulation, litigation, and competition”. Has The Economist concluded that companies are no longer constrained by ethics? 
BARRY NELSONJupiter, Florida 
It was interesting to read about how scientists are working on a diagnostic device based on the odour associated with Parkinson’s disease (“Sniffing out Parkinson’s”, March 30th). On San Juan Island in Washington state, an organisation called Pads for Parkinson’s uses specially trained dogs to detect the Parkinson’s scent. These particular dogs seem to have hyperosmia and are successful at this task. Developing an electronic sniffer for Parkinson’s is a worthy goal, but man’s best friend provides a low-cost alternative to sniff out vulnerable patients now. 
MICHAEL DEVIRIANFriday Harbour, Washington 
As a counterbalance to the “dark past” of Japan’s somei-yoshino cherry trees you could have mentioned the sunlight sakura (“Flower power”, April 6th). This variety of cherry was developed by Masaaki Takaoka specifically to mourn those who fell in the second world war, both Japanese and foreign. He spent 30 years trying to create a hybrid that would flourish in climates from Siberia to the tropics, so that they could be sent around the world as a prayer for peace. Eventually he succeeded, and to date 50,000 have been planted in more than 20 countries. 
The story is told in a film directed by Gen Takahashi called “Yoko the Cherry Blossom”. 
BEN JONESSt Nicholas-at-Wade, Kent 
You ask us to imagine “if you could move all your friends and posts to Acebook, a firm with higher privacy standards than Facebook and which gave you a cut of its advertising revenues” (“Europe takes on the tech giants”, March 23rd). This may merely be an exercise in circularity as the domain name “Acebook.com” is, in fact, owned by Facebook. I don’t anticipate them giving me any share of the advertising revenues. 
ALLEN CONTICanfield, Ohio 
