###### On animal rights, genocide, working, Foucault, Brexit, Santa Claus
# Letters 
##### Letters to the editor 
> Jan 12th 2019 
The speciousness of animal rights is obvious when one considers what animals do to each other in nature (“Do they have rights?”, December 22nd). When a cheetah kills a gazelle, are rights being violated? Is a crime being committed? Is the gazelle’s family entitled to damages? Jurists who find these questions perplexing are more likely to find clarity in basic moral philosophy than in case law. Especially helpful is Immanuel Kant’s grounding of duties and rights in our acceptance of a universal moral law, our capacity to recognise the rights of others and temper our behaviour accordingly. This trait is uniquely human. 
The fact that animals can feel pain or show glimmers of human-like cognition or behaviour does not confer rights. Laws protecting animals are perfectly justifiable, not because they have rights, but because we value their welfare and are repulsed by acts of cruelty against them. Upholding such laws does not require the cascade of nonsense that would ensue from pretending that animals have moral or legal standing. 
Thinkers of a certain bent will find it irresistible to attack the species barrier by deconstructing human behaviour into purely biological or evolutionary factors. At the rawest levels of description, they may have a point. Still, the fact that “animal law” seems to focus exclusively on how people treat them, rather than how animals treat themselves, is a tacit acknowledgment of a moral distinction. 
HENRY STEPHENSONO’Fallon, Illinois 
I was excited to see your article on the advancement of animal rights. Your newspaper has frequently called for a bolder and more radical modern liberalism, and this is an obvious issue in need of an update. Although animal welfare in general remains complicated (and I for one have no desire to give rights to clams), species such as great apes, dolphins and whales have demonstrated conscious awareness and emotional experience beyond reasonable doubt. Their basic right to life, without cruelty or extreme confinement, should be a no-brainer for all liberals seeking to advance happiness and freedom. I would love to see The Economist adopt this radical, but entirely reasonable, position. 
JUSTIN GILESCharlotte, North Carolina 
I read with great interest, and indeed sadness, your piece on genocide prevention (“Never again, again and again”, December 8th). In your brief account of the Rwandan genocide, you referred specifically to Hutu officers organising adult Hutus to slaughter their Tutsi neighbours. Although most of those who committed genocidal acts in Rwanda were indeed adults, there were nonetheless some children, including the very young, who were involved as perpetrators. 
The participation of children in acts of atrocity carries with it certain implications, particularly when it comes to how countries deal with such violent crimes. Regrettably, Rwanda is not the exception. To provide just one recent example, video propaganda from Islamic State over the past couple of years has shown children as executioners in Syria. International efforts to prevent and respond to such tragic events must not neglect children’s involvement. 
DR JASTINE BARRETTHarpenden, Hertfordshire 
Regarding the prospect of a four-day work week, an understanding of the past is indeed in order, but it is too simple to say that “organised labour has led the charge for reduced working hours” (Free exchange, December 22nd). Christian clergy and lay leaders on both sides of the Atlantic collaborated with labour to push for shorter hours in the 19th century. Rabbi Bernard Drachman of the Jewish Sabbath Alliance campaigned for a five-day week in America as early as 1910. In earlier times, Puritans passed legislation to ensure workers had time for recreation. And laws dating to 958 in England and 1203 in Scotland restricted labour on Saturday afternoons in order to prepare for the Sabbath. 
Those who wish to secure a four-day work week should note that the weekend as we know it has been brought about not only by organised labour, but also by organised religion. 
KARL JOHNSONIthaca, New York 
The illustrated calendar in The World in 2019 depicts the wrong Foucault. Léon Foucault, known for his pendulum and celebrating his 200th birthday in September 2019, died with a full head of hair and favoured three-piece suits over turtlenecks. Pictured in his stead, with trademark bald pate and spectacles, is Michel Foucault, a French philosopher and literary theorist. Acolytes of Foucauldian-discourse analysis will toast to the centennial of his birth in 2026. 
PETER KALALNew York 
EU member countries than non-members (“Brussels pouts”, December 22nd). Sadly, this was not David Cameron’s experience before the referendum in 2016. Back then, the EU should have offered an emergency brake on free movement. But it is not too late. Indeed, given the events in Europe over the past two years, an EU-wide emergency brake of some form would probably be welcomed throughout the EU. Now we know so much more about Brexit, that concession would certainly clinch a vote for Remain in a re-run. Come on Angela! 
ANDREW ROBSONChailey, East Sussex 
I asked my daughter, who studies classics, to give me a Greek word for a political system where the incompetent, the irresponsible, the corrupt and the con artists emerge in political parties and manage to win elections. The term she gave me was “kakistocracy”. I prefer Bagehot’s more pedestrian and less cacophonic term: “chumocracy” (December 22nd). 
CLAUDIO COLTROMilan 
Perhaps “chumpocracy” would be more apt. 
ANDREW JOHNSTONRadley, Oxfordshire 
As a former consultant, I enjoyed Bartleby’s report on Santa Claus’s organisation at the North Pole (December 22nd). However, his good journalistic instincts got in the way of consulting best practice. There was a distinct lack of incomprehensible jargon, and the recommendations were delivered in clearly written prose, instead of a baffling 45-slide PowerPoint deck. 
Nevertheless I’ll look forward this year to a progress report on how things are going with outsourcing the RDO (reindeer delivery operations), changes to the CECA (chimney-enabled customer access) process, and the NONVT (naughty-or-nice verification transformation) project. I am sure Bartleby’s imaginary consultancy firm will be happy to help with these initiatives (for a juicy fee and Lapland Airways expenses, of course). 
NATHANIEL KENTLondon 
Surely Bartleby’s “Yule University” would be a member of the Holly League. 
CHARLIE WILSONOxford 
