###### On Brexit, Afghanistan, popes, Einstein, Columbus, T. Boone Pickens
# Letters to the editor 
> Oct 5th 2019 
Clearly you have thrown caution to the wind regarding any reluctance to hold back on your ill-concealed bile regarding Boris Johnson (“The reckoning”, September 28th). You say he is the worst prime minister in living memory, an opinion so grossly uncharitable that it could only emanate from rabid, Brussels-infatuated journalists, wholly given over to Remain propaganda. A few lines later, you say he is “inadequate” to the task and only in office because of Brexit. Is this surprising when one considers how deliberately the deep-state establishment has done its best to scupper Brexit altogether? It would dishonour the wishes of 17.4m of us stupid, brainless, moronic, uneducated, gormless halfwits, who want our government back, who want to control our own borders, make our own laws, spend our own money, and who do not wish to be ruled by France and Germany and their back-scratching bureaucrats, manipulating a hopeless crony capitalism. 
You know very well that the euro is on life support and can only prosper if fiscal union is achieved, which implies the end of the nation state. The Lisbon treaty demands full compliance in fiscal and monetary policy, in defence and social interaction, of which the most economically damaging and socially divisive is uncontrolled immigration. 
Is it right-wing to resist these negative developments? Is it wrong to want sovereignty returned? Is it unacceptable to wish not to be a continental European? You leave me almost speechless at your lack of patriotism (let me guess, you have a house in France and friends in Tuscany). For you democracy is dead, replaced by technocracy, the rule of Plato’s golden souls who know (how do they?) all the outcomes, the ideal way forward, the prescriptions for universal happiness, unlike us benighted, dead-wood, has-beens. 
DAVID MAPLESPetersfield, Hampshire 
Asking people to vote in a second referendum would be an incredible mark of disrespect. It would mean that democracy has been replaced with a pernicious kind of dictatorship where people are still allowed to speak up, but their voices are never heard. 
KENJI OSHIGURUYokohama, Japan 
Charlemagne has the cheek to mention “the EU’s commitment to free trade” and the Doha round of multilateral trade negotiations (September 14th). In fact, the EU was the principal culprit in wrecking this round to defend the economic obscenity of the common agricultural policy, which you described as “disgraceful” at the time (“Deadlocked in Doha”, March 29th 2003). That article foretold that the failure of Doha would result in “trade-diverting bilateral or regional trade deals”. The EU is not committed to free trade. It is committed to managed trade to protect the CAP. 
CHARLES EFFORDLondon 
Regarding the stalled peace deal with the Taliban in Afghanistan (“Talking chop”, September 14th), the overwhelming brunt of the fighting is conducted by the Afghan National Security Forces who, because of their limited training and capability, are taking huge casualties. The Afghan government stopped publishing the data in 2017 but one reliable estimate suggests some 20 are killed each day. This affects morale and recruitment; their NATO co-operation troops have to work hard to keep them going. Despite the collective effort, the Afghan government controls just over 50% of the country, at best. 
This demonstrates that, although a peace settlement is ultimately the only way to settle Afghanistan, this is not the time to tinker with NATO force numbers. We should not forget that it was the withdrawal of Russian co-operation troops in 1992, not the Soviets’ cessation of formal combat operations in 1989, that presaged the collapse of the Najibullah regime and the eventual Taliban takeover in 1996. The parallels are not encouraging. 
In all this, Britain has responsibilities distinct from our duty as a NATO ally. These are to support and sustain the legitimate Afghan government and its security forces and to protect our partners in that struggle, especially our former interpreters. Our history and engagement with Afghanistan and the sacrifices of the campaign demand nothing less. 
COLONEL (RET’D) SIMON DIGGINSDefence attaché, Kabul 2008-10Rickmansworth, Hertfordshire 
Schumpeter described Catholic social teaching as “pro-capitalist” (September 7th). True, the church has long rejected collectivism and championed private enterprise. But popes have also cautioned against capitalism, not least its neoliberal iteration. Pius XII blamed “the exploitation of private capital” (as well as “state absolutism”) for working people’s “servitude”. Paul VI criticised the “unbridled liberalism” inherent in capitalism. John Paul II condemned the increasingly “intrusive, even invasive, character of the logic of the market”. Benedict XVI called for “a new economic model”. Pope Francis stands squarely in this tradition, which doesn’t fit neatly on the secular left-right ideological spectrum. 
DAN BRENDELOceanside, California 
It is interesting that the Albert Einstein exhibition in Shanghai ignores the fact that he supported some communist causes in the 1920s and 1930s, though not all (“Relatively revealing”, September 21st). Einstein campaigned, for example, for the freedom of the Noulens couple, who had been arrested in Shanghai in 1931 for being leading members of the Communist International’s liaison office with East and South-East Asian communist parties, all of them illegal at the time. He also supported, after an about turn, the Moscow show trials. Yet, in 1931 he had written in a private letter: 
I am not for punishment at all, but only for measures that serve society and its protection. In principle I would not be opposed to killing individuals who are worthless or dangerous in that sense. I am against it only because I do not trust people, ie, the courts. 
FREDDY LITTENMunich 
For those who may not be able to get to Columbus, Indiana, to check out its surprising Modernist buildings, I recommend an offbeat movie called, somewhat unsurprisingly, “Columbus” (“Modernism in the cornfields”, September 14th). It features most of the architectural gems referred to in your article, and it got sparkling reviews. As Rotten Tomatoes says, “‘Columbus’…balances the clean lines of architecture against the messiness of love.” 
NIGEL BRACHIEdmonton, Canada 
T. Boone Pickens didn’t just show inefficient firms who was boss (Buttonwood, September 21st). When Drake, a hip-hop star, posted a humble brag on Twitter that making “the first million is the hardest”, Pickens shot back: “the first billion is a helluva lot harder.” 
YACOV ARNOPOLINLondon 
