###### The bard’s ascent
# When was greatness thrust upon William Shakespeare? 
> print-edition iconPrint edition | Graphic detail | Oct 26th 2019 
“HE WAS NOT of an age, but for all time,” wrote Ben Jonson, a peer of William Shakespeare’s, in the preface to the First Folio—a collection of the bard’s works published in 1623, seven years after he died. Today, those words seem prophetic. In Jonson’s time, they were mostly just polite. 
Shakespeare was popular in his day. His company drew large crowds at the Globe Theatre in London, and sometimes performed at court. But other authors of that era were more acclaimed. Francis Beaumont was buried in Poets’ Corner at Westminster Abbey, near Geoffrey Chaucer. Jonson received a royal pension for writing. When Will died, few would have guessed that all the world would become his stage. 
A newly digitised version of “The London Stage”, a record of performances from 1660 to 1800, tracks Shakespeare’s ascent to unquestioned supremacy. Mattie Burkert, the project’s leader, says the data are patchy from 1660, when theatres reopened after a Puritan ban, to 1700, when daily newspapers began. Moreover, attributing shows to authors is tricky in the 17th century, since most were advertised without naming the playwright. Nonetheless, of 2,300 events recorded in this period, just 122 (5%) included material that might have been by Shakespeare. The data give more credits to two newer writers, John Fletcher (with 191) and John Dryden (137). Courtiers returning from France preferred libertine heroes and neo-classical styles. Shakespeare’s untutored mingling of fools and kings seemed odd, so dramatists often rewrote his texts. 
Shakespeare’s star began to rise a century after his death. Fiona Ritchie, a scholar who specialises in his 18th-century reputation, notes a few causes. Some adaptations of his work, such as a happily ending “King Lear”, became popular. In the 1730s the Shakespeare Ladies’ Club, a group of aristocratic women, petitioned theatre owners to stage his plays rather than foreign operas. Comedies such as “Twelfth Night” and “As You Like It”, now featuring female actresses, came back into fashion. 
Even as the appetite for comedies grew, eminent actors—above all David Garrick—used sturdier roles, such as Richard III and Macbeth, to boost their careers. In 1769 Garrick organised a jubilee of Shakespeare’s birth, to celebrate “the god of our idolatry”. Shakespeare has held that status ever since. Harold Bloom, a critic who died on October 14th (see Obituary), called his plays “the outward limit of human achievement”. 
By 1800, 9% of shows in London used his material—down from a peak of 17%, but much more than his rivals. Today, Londoners still lend him their ears. Using listings from UK Theatre Web, an online archive, we estimate that the city’s big theatres have put on 360,000 performances since 2000 (including musicals and operas to mimic the older data). Of those, Shakespeare accounts for some 19,000, or 5%. Although this share is similar to that of the 17th century, it is far more impressive, since Shakespeare must now compete with thousands of writers who had not been born in 1700. 
London’s taste for specific plays has evolved. “A Midsummer Night’s Dream”, once seen as insipid, is now the most performed. But the split among comedies, tragedies and histories remains similar to that in 1740-1800. It was the thespians of that age who prepared him for all time. ■ 
Sources: London Stage Database; UK Theatre Web 
