###### On the purpose of a company
# Letters to the editor 
> Sep 21st 2019 
Your leader and briefing on “What companies are for” (August 24th) were among the most important I have read in The Economist. We live in strange times, when innovations are expanding potential GDP hugely, and, at the same time, fuelling conflict, disenchantment and the marginalisation of many. We saw similar changes during the Industrial Revolution. We came out of that era just fine, not just because of reformers like Robert Peel and Robert Owen, but also because of original thinkers who changed our very understanding of capitalism. The Industrial Revolution coincided with the biggest breakthroughs in economics, from Adam Smith’s seminal book in 1776, through the works of Augustin Cournot, Karl Marx and John Stuart Mill, to Léon Walras. 
The complexity of your cover story’s prescriptions is a reminder that we are at a turning point in history, where we need novel reforms. The solution is not going to be easy. Economics needs creativity of the kind seen 200 years ago. 
PROFESSOR KAUSHIK BASUFormer chief economist at the World BankIthaca, New York 
The stirring among some billionaire chief executives at the Business Roundtable who want to redefine the purpose of a company beyond maximising shareholder value is not unprecedented. In the mid-19th century it was a given that employers operated with a legal if not moral obligation to consider the well-being of their employees as well as their neighbours and customers. That idea faded almost entirely in America by the early 20th century, but was revived a bit in the 1960s. So the current thinking is rather a sad repeat of the attention given in the 1970s in the media and some business schools and think-tanks to what companies owe to the rest of American society beside their own profitability. Milton Friedman was inspired to protest against that thinking, arguing that companies have only one priority, namely to maximise the earnings of shareholders. The business-responsibility idea soon faded after it became amply clear that the whole thing was little more than a public-relations gesture at a time of considerable social and economic agitation. 
The real problem is that so many public goods, such as education, the arts and philanthropy, are already dependent on private billionaires and their sometimes benign but sometimes sleazy foundations. But why should we invite corporate billionaires to control which social and economic problems deserve attention, to say nothing about how those problems might be treated? In fact, corporate boards and CEOs already exercise outsize influence on the political process, policymaking and government administration at every level. 
Maybe Friedman was right: companies have only one legitimate priority. Maybe it is time to let others have a fair chance to influence policy. 
RICHARD ABRAMSEmeritus professor of historyUniversity of California, Berkeley 
John Maynard Keynes wrestled with these questions in the “The End of Laissez-Faire”, published in 1926. He concluded then that: “Our problem is to work out a social organisation which shall be as efficient as possible without offending our notions of a satisfactory life.” 
ROBERT OBERLitchfield, Connecticut 
The Business Roundtable’s commitment to other stakeholders as well as shareholders has long been fundamental to its policy. Its new statement is an affirmation of this de facto record rather than a response to an environmental and social governance fad. My own experience involved a bold initiative by the Roundtable with civil-rights and women’s-rights leaders on some major legislation. The rationale for breaking away from the rest of the business community was both that its member companies were already committed to responsible policies on race and gender and that this was where the entire business community needed to be. 
KATHERINE HAGENFormer vice-president for government affairs at AT&TGrasse, France 
The dilemma for some companies about whether to pursue shareholder value alone is illustrated by Cathay Pacific. Should it kowtow to the demands of the Chinese government and sack staff who participate in the protests in Hong Kong, or should it meet its responsibilities to its employees and society? Cathay is in a tricky situation but ultimately must respect the rights of its workers. Companies do not need to become vanguards of democracy and do-goodery, but they should ensure that staff, communities and customers are not harmed as a result of their pursuit of profit. 
KATRYN WRIGHLondon 
A crucial argument against corporate do-gooding is conflict of interest. Should we allow companies, rather than governments, to set corporate behavioural norms? Firms have a strong incentive to avoid rules that go against the interests of shareholders or managers. For example, would a company benefiting from a monopoly promote strong competition? Democratic governments are accountable to their citizens and suffer no such conflict of interest. They are better placed to set rules on their people’s behalf. 
RICHARD WILLIAMSONEly, Cambridgeshire 
You ignored the law. A company’s directors and officers have a fiduciary duty to look out for the best interests of the corporation and its shareholders. Often, this fiduciary obligation is compatible with respecting other stakeholders’ interests, because looking out for all stakeholders helps move everyone towards long-term business success. But if there ever is a conflict the interests of the company and its shareholders will override the interests of others. 
DANA SHULTZPiedmont, California 
The clearest arguments in support of shareholders’ interests were handed down by the Michigan Supreme Court 100 years ago in Dodge v Ford Motor Company. In that case Henry Ford (who could hardly be accused of an agency problem) claimed that his company was organised “to do as much good as we can, everywhere, for everybody concerned” and only “incidentally to make money”. 
The court disagreed. Citing Ford’s testimony, it ruled the corporation could make “an incidental humanitarian expenditure of corporate funds”, but it could not commit to “a general purpose and plan to benefit mankind at the expense” of shareholders. 
A.S. ILKSONWoodstock, New York 
Shareholder primacy is anti-scientific, wrong, immoral (not just amoral) and very damaging. Oh, and really bad business. Those who reproduce the propaganda of this parasitic variety of capitalism that has been dominant for the past 30 years are part of the problem, not the solution. 
JOREN DE WACHTERBrussels 
The question of what the proper purpose of a company should be has bedevilled thinkers ever since its modern inception. Edward Thurlow, a British lord chancellor in the late 18th century, observed that: “Corporations have neither bodies to be punished, nor souls to be condemned; they therefore do as they like.” 
CHRISTINE SAYERSRome 
